docs/articles/visualization.md, before:

# Visualization

This module provides a variety of options for getting a global view of
your data, making comparisons, and highlighting trends.

**Note:** Data visualization is most effective when illustrating a point
or answering a question you have about your data, not as a means to find
a point/question.

There is a wide variety of plotting options in **msDiaLogue**. What
plots are possible depend on what data you have and what analyses have
been run. See below for more details of individual plot types.

## Preliminary

``` r

## load R package
library(msDiaLogue)
## preprocessing
fileName <- "../inst/extdata/Toy_Spectronaut_Data.csv"
dataSet <- preprocessing(fileName,
                         filterNaN = TRUE, filterUnique = 2,
                         replaceBlank = TRUE, saveRm = TRUE)
## transformation
dataTran <- transform(dataSet, logFold = 2)
## normalization
dataNorm <- normalize(dataTran, normalizeType = "quant")
## filtering
dataImput_pre <- filterNA(dataNorm, minProp = 0.51, by = "cond", saveRm = TRUE)
## imputation
dataImput <- impute.min_local(dataImput_pre)
## analysis: MA
anlys_ma <- analyze.ma(dataImput, ref = "50pmol")
## analysis: Empirical Bayes moderated t-test
anlys_modt <- analyze.mod_t(dataImput, ref = "50pmol", adjust.method = "none")
## analysis: PCA
names(dataImput)[sapply(dataImput, function(col) length(unique(col)) == 1)]
dataPCA <- dataImput[, colnames(dataImput) != "ALBU_BOVIN"]
anlys_pca <- analyze.pca(dataPCA, center = TRUE, scale = TRUE)
## analysis: PLS-DA
anlys_plsda <- analyze.plsda(dataImput, method = "kernelpls",
                             center = TRUE, scale = FALSE)
```

## Boxplot

``` r

visualize.boxplot(dataNorm)
#> Warning: Removed 55 rows containing non-finite outside the scale range
#> (`stat_boxplot()`).
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-3-1.png)

## Distributions plot

To examine whether missing values are biased towards lower-abundance
proteins, the distribution plot helps clearly distinguish proteins with
and without missing values.

``` r

visualize.dist(dataTran)
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-4-1.png)

In the left panel, the Missing group is concentrated in the
low-abundance range, showing a sharper peak than the Valid group, whose
distribution is flatter and more diffuse. This indicates that proteins
with missing values generally have lower abundance—a typical pattern in
proteomics and metabolomics, where low-abundance signals are more prone
to missingness (MNAR).

In the right panel, the ECDF reveals the same pattern: the Missing group
rises more quickly and reaches high cumulative probability at lower
abundance levels, confirming that its average-abundance distribution is
left-shifted relative to the Valid group.

## Heatmap

The package offers two options for plotting the heatmap, regardless of
whether missing values exist.

- Option 1 utilizes the source package `pheatmap`, capable of plotting
  the dendrogram simultaneously. It is the default choice for heatmaps
  in this package.

``` r

visualize.heatmap(dataImput, pkg = "pheatmap",
                  cluster_cols = TRUE, cluster_rows = TRUE,
                  show_colnames = TRUE, show_rownames = TRUE)
#> Warning: Setting row names on a tibble is deprecated.
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-5-1.png)

When protein names are excessively long, it is recommended to set
`show_rownames = FALSE` to view the full heatmap.

If the input data contains an NA value, the heatmap will be binary for
missing data patterns, i.e., whether values are present or absent.

``` r

visualize.heatmap(dataSet, pkg = "pheatmap",
                  cluster_cols = FALSE, cluster_rows = FALSE,
                  show_colnames = TRUE, show_rownames = TRUE,
                  show_pct_cols = FALSE, show_pct_rows = TRUE,
                  show_pct_legend = TRUE, saveRes = TRUE)
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-6-1.png)

- Option 2 use the source package `ggplot2` to generate a ggplot object
  but does not include the dendrogram.

``` r

visualize.heatmap(dataImput, pkg = "ggplot2")
#> Warning: Setting row names on a tibble is deprecated.
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-7-1.png)

In a heatmap, similar colors within a row indicate relatively consistent
values, suggesting similar protein expression levels across different
samples.

``` r

visualize.heatmap(dataSet, pkg = "ggplot2",
                  show_pct_cols = FALSE, show_pct_rows = TRUE,
                  show_pct_legend = TRUE, saveRes = TRUE)
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-8-1.png)

## MA plot

### Examples

``` r

visualize.ma(anlys_ma$`100pmol-50pmol`, M.thres = 1)
#> Warning: Removed 32 rows containing missing values or values outside the scale range
#> (`geom_text_repel()`).
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-9-1.png)

where `M.thres = 1` means the M thresholds are set to -1 and 1. The
scatters are split into three parts: up regulation (M \> 1), no
regulation (-1 $`\leq`$ M $`\leq`$ 1), and down regulation (M \< -1).
Additionally, the warning message “Removed 32 rows containing missing
values” indicates that there are 32 proteins with no regulation.

If the input `dataSet` is the whole list `anlys_MA`, **msDiaLogue** will
produce individual subplots corresponding to each comparison.

``` r

visualize.ma(anlys_ma, M.thres = 1)
#> Warning: Removed 63 rows containing missing values or values outside the scale range
#> (`geom_text_repel()`).
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-10-1.png)

### Details

An MA plot visualizes the differences between measurements taken in two
samples, by transforming the data onto M (log ratio or fold change) and
A (mean average) scales. The MA plot puts the variable M on the y-axis
and A on the x-axis and gives a quick overview of the distribution of
the data. Most proteins are expected to show little variation, and so
the majority of the points will be concentrated around the M = 0 line
(no difference between group means). Typically, points falling above
$`abs(1)`$ are highlighted.

**Note:** As the MA plot does not include any measure of statistical
significance, it cannot directly identify which proteins are
statistically differentially expressed.

An MA plot, short for “M vs. A plot,” which uses two axes:

- M axis (vertical): Represents the fold change, usually on the
  logarithm base 2 scale, or the ratio of the expression levels, between
  two conditions. It is calculated as:
  ``` math
  M = log_2(X/Y) = log_2 X - log_2 Y
  ```
- A axis (horizontal): Represents the average intensity of the two
  conditions, calculated as:
  ``` math
  A = \frac{1}{2}log_2(XY) = \frac{1}{2}\left[log_2(X)+log_2(Y)\right]
  ```

Most proteins are expected to exhibit little variation, leading to the
majority of points concentrating around the line M = 0 (indicating no
difference between group means).

## Rank abundance distribution plot (Whittaker plot)

The rank abundance plot shows proteins ranked by abundance to visualize
distribution patterns and highlight specific proteins across conditions
or replicates.

``` r

visualize.rank(dataImput, listName = "POLK_HUMAN",
               facet = c("Replicate", "Condition"))
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-11-1.png)

## Histogram of fold changes and p-values for test

### Examples

``` r

visualize.test(anlys_modt$`100pmol-50pmol`)
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-12-1.png)

If the input `dataSet` is the whole list `anlys_modt`, **msDiaLogue**
will produce individual subplots corresponding to each comparison.

``` r

visualize.test(anlys_modt)
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-13-1.png)

### Details

The function `visualize().test` can be applied to any test output. It
generates two useful plots: a histogram of fold changes across the
analyzed proteins and a histogram of p-values. The majority of proteins
are expected to show very small change between conditions, so the fold
change histogram will have a peak at around zero. For the p-values, most
p-values are expected to be non-significant (above 0.05). Depending on
the strength of the treatment effect, there may be a peak of p-values
near 0.

## UpSet plot

The UpSet plot is a visual representation that helps display the overlap
and intersection of sets or categories in a dataset. It is particularly
useful for illustrating the presence or absence of elements in
combinations of sets.

``` r

visualize.upset(dataSet)
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-14-1.png)

This plot reveals that 42 proteins are shared by 50pmol, 100pmol, and
200pmol, while only 3 proteins are shared by 100 pmol and 200pmol, but
not with 50pmol.

## Venn plot

The Venn plot is another graphical representation of the relationships
between sets. Each circle represents a set, and the overlapping regions
show the elements that are shared between sets.

``` r

visualize.venn(dataSet, show_percentage = TRUE,
               fill_color = c("blue", "yellow", "green", "red"),
               saveRes = TRUE)
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-15-1.png)

where `saveRes = TRUE` refers to the data containing logical columns
representing sets in Venn plot information will be saved as a .csv file
named *venn_information.csv* in the current working directory.

In the example above, 50pmol, 100pmol, and 200pmol groups share 42
proteins. Notably, 3 proteins are exclusively found in the 100pmol and
200pmol groups.

## Volcano plot

### Examples

``` r

visualize.volcano(anlys_modt$`100pmol-50pmol`, P.thres = 0.05, F.thres = 1)
#> Warning: Removed 32 rows containing missing values or values outside the scale range
#> (`geom_text_repel()`).
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-16-1.png)

If the input `dataSet` is the whole list `anlys_modt`, **msDiaLogue**
will produce individual subplots corresponding to each comparison.

``` r

visualize.volcano(anlys_modt, P.thres = 0.05, F.thres = 1)
#> Warning: Removed 65 rows containing missing values or values outside the scale range
#> (`geom_text_repel()`).
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-17-1.png)

### Details

A volcano plot is a graphical representation commonly used in proteomics
and genomics to visualize differential expression analysis results. It
is particularly useful for identifying significant changes in extensive
data. It displays two important pieces of information about differences
between conditions in a dataset:

- Statistical significance (vertical): Represents the negative log10 of
  the p-value.

- Fold change (horizontal): Represents the fold change.

## Scree plot

One way to help identify how many PCs to retain is to explore a scree
plot. The scree plot shows the percentage of variance explained by each
PC.

``` r

visualize.scree(anlys_pca, type = c("bar", "line"),
                bar.color = "gray", bar.fill = "gray", line.color = "black",
                label = TRUE, ncp = 10)
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-18-1.png)

where `label = TRUE` adds information labels at the top of bars/points,
and `ncp = 10` sets the number of dimension to be displayed.

## Score plot / graph of individuals

### Example

``` r

visualize.score(anlys_pca, ellipse = TRUE, ellipse.level = 0.95, label = TRUE)
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-19-1.png)

### Details

The primary PCA plot of individual data visually represents the
distribution of individual observations in a reduced-dimensional space,
typically defined by the PCs. The x and y axes of the PCA plot represent
the PCs. Each axis corresponds to a linear combination of the original
variables. Individual data points on the PCA plot represent observations
(e.g., samples) from the original dataset. Points that are close to the
origin (0, 0), are close to the “average” across all protein abundances.
If sufficient samples are present, the plot will also produce a 95%
confidence ellipse, as well as a centroid (mean for each group
provided), for each groups (condition) provided.

## Loading plot / graph of variables

### Example

``` r

visualize.loading(anlys_pca, label = TRUE)
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-20-1.png)

### Details

This plot will be more useful if your analyses are based on a relatively
small number of proteins. It represents the association, or loading of
each protein on the first two PCs. Longer arrows represents stronger
associations.

**Note:** Proteins that are weakly associated with PC1 or PC2 may still
be highly correlated with other PCs not being plotted. Consult the scree
plot (and other available methods) to determine the appropriate number
of PCs to investigate.

## Biplot of score (individuals) and loading (variables)

The biplot includes individual and variable plots. Again, with a large
number of proteins, this plot can be unwieldy.

``` r

visualize.biplot(anlys_pca, ellipse = TRUE, ellipse.level = 0.95, label = "all")
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-21-1.png)

## VIP score plot

This combined plot pairs a VIP-score chart on the left with a heatmap on
the right. The left panel shows each variable as a dot at its VIP score
from PLS-DA. Higher scores indicate greater importance for class
separation. The right panel uses colored tiles to show each top
variable’s average abundance across conditions. So you can instantly see
which variables matter most for class separation and how they behave in
each condition.

``` r

visualize.vip(anlys_plsda, comp = 1, num = 10, thres = 1)
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-22-1.png)

[←
Previous](https://uconn-scs.github.io/msDiaLogue/articles/analysis.md)

[Next →](https://uconn-scs.github.io/msDiaLogue/articles/other.md)

Commit message:

update visualize.dist(): comparative density plots (fixes #8)

docs/articles/visualization.md, after:

# Visualization

This module provides a variety of options for getting a global view of
your data, making comparisons, and highlighting trends.

**Note:** Data visualization is most effective when illustrating a point
or answering a question you have about your data, not as a means to find
a point/question.

There is a wide variety of plotting options in **msDiaLogue**. What
plots are possible depend on what data you have and what analyses have
been run. See below for more details of individual plot types.

## Preliminary

``` r

## load R package
library(msDiaLogue)
## preprocessing
fileName <- "../inst/extdata/Toy_Spectronaut_Data.csv"
dataSet <- preprocessing(fileName,
                         filterNaN = TRUE, filterUnique = 2,
                         replaceBlank = TRUE, saveRm = TRUE)
## transformation
dataTran <- transform(dataSet, logFold = 2)
## normalization
dataNorm <- normalize(dataTran, normalizeType = "quant")
## filtering
dataImput_pre <- filterNA(dataNorm, minProp = 0.51, by = "cond", saveRm = TRUE)
## imputation
dataImput <- impute.min_local(dataImput_pre)
## analysis: MA
anlys_ma <- analyze.ma(dataImput, ref = "50pmol")
## analysis: Empirical Bayes moderated t-test
anlys_modt <- analyze.mod_t(dataImput, ref = "50pmol", adjust.method = "none")
## analysis: PCA
names(dataImput)[sapply(dataImput, function(col) length(unique(col)) == 1)]
dataPCA <- dataImput[, colnames(dataImput) != "ALBU_BOVIN"]
anlys_pca <- analyze.pca(dataPCA, center = TRUE, scale = TRUE)
## analysis: PLS-DA
anlys_plsda <- analyze.plsda(dataImput, method = "kernelpls",
                             center = TRUE, scale = FALSE)
```

## Boxplot

``` r

visualize.boxplot(dataNorm)
#> Warning: Removed 55 rows containing non-finite outside the scale range
#> (`stat_boxplot()`).
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-3-1.png)

## Distributions plot

To examine whether missing values are biased towards lower-abundance
proteins, the distribution plot helps clearly distinguish proteins with
and without missing values.

``` r

visualize.dist(dataTran)
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-4-1.png)

In the left panel, the Missing group is concentrated in the
low-abundance range, showing a sharper peak than the Valid group, whose
distribution is flatter and more diffuse. This indicates that proteins
with missing values generally have lower abundance—a typical pattern in
proteomics and metabolomics, where low-abundance signals are more prone
to missingness (MNAR).

In the right panel, the ECDF reveals the same pattern: the Missing group
rises more quickly and reaches high cumulative probability at lower
abundance levels, confirming that its average-abundance distribution is
left-shifted relative to the Valid group.

If the input is a list of data frames (e.g., before and after
imputation), density plots are arranged side by side to enable direct
comparison of distributional changes.

``` r

visualize.dist(list("Pre-Imputation" = dataNorm, "Post-Imputation" = dataImput))
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-5-1.png)

## Heatmap

The package offers two options for plotting the heatmap, regardless of
whether missing values exist.

- Option 1 utilizes the source package `pheatmap`, capable of plotting
  the dendrogram simultaneously. It is the default choice for heatmaps
  in this package.

``` r

visualize.heatmap(dataImput, pkg = "pheatmap",
                  cluster_cols = TRUE, cluster_rows = TRUE,
                  show_colnames = TRUE, show_rownames = TRUE)
#> Warning: Setting row names on a tibble is deprecated.
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-6-1.png)

When protein names are excessively long, it is recommended to set
`show_rownames = FALSE` to view the full heatmap.

If the input data contains an NA value, the heatmap will be binary for
missing data patterns, i.e., whether values are present or absent.

``` r

visualize.heatmap(dataSet, pkg = "pheatmap",
                  cluster_cols = FALSE, cluster_rows = FALSE,
                  show_colnames = TRUE, show_rownames = TRUE,
                  show_pct_cols = FALSE, show_pct_rows = TRUE,
                  show_pct_legend = TRUE, saveRes = TRUE)
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-7-1.png)

- Option 2 use the source package `ggplot2` to generate a ggplot object
  but does not include the dendrogram.

``` r

visualize.heatmap(dataImput, pkg = "ggplot2")
#> Warning: Setting row names on a tibble is deprecated.
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-8-1.png)

In a heatmap, similar colors within a row indicate relatively consistent
values, suggesting similar protein expression levels across different
samples.

``` r

visualize.heatmap(dataSet, pkg = "ggplot2",
                  show_pct_cols = FALSE, show_pct_rows = TRUE,
                  show_pct_legend = TRUE, saveRes = TRUE)
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-9-1.png)

## MA plot

### Examples

``` r

visualize.ma(anlys_ma$`100pmol-50pmol`, M.thres = 1)
#> Warning: Removed 32 rows containing missing values or values outside the scale range
#> (`geom_text_repel()`).
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-10-1.png)

where `M.thres = 1` means the M thresholds are set to -1 and 1. The
scatters are split into three parts: up regulation (M \> 1), no
regulation (-1 $`\leq`$ M $`\leq`$ 1), and down regulation (M \< -1).
Additionally, the warning message “Removed 32 rows containing missing
values” indicates that there are 32 proteins with no regulation.

If the input `dataSet` is the whole list `anlys_MA`, **msDiaLogue** will
produce individual subplots corresponding to each comparison.

``` r

visualize.ma(anlys_ma, M.thres = 1)
#> Warning: Removed 63 rows containing missing values or values outside the scale range
#> (`geom_text_repel()`).
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-11-1.png)

### Details

An MA plot visualizes the differences between measurements taken in two
samples, by transforming the data onto M (log ratio or fold change) and
A (mean average) scales. The MA plot puts the variable M on the y-axis
and A on the x-axis and gives a quick overview of the distribution of
the data. Most proteins are expected to show little variation, and so
the majority of the points will be concentrated around the M = 0 line
(no difference between group means). Typically, points falling above
$`abs(1)`$ are highlighted.

**Note:** As the MA plot does not include any measure of statistical
significance, it cannot directly identify which proteins are
statistically differentially expressed.

An MA plot, short for “M vs. A plot,” which uses two axes:

- M axis (vertical): Represents the fold change, usually on the
  logarithm base 2 scale, or the ratio of the expression levels, between
  two conditions. It is calculated as:
  ``` math
  M = log_2(X/Y) = log_2 X - log_2 Y
  ```
- A axis (horizontal): Represents the average intensity of the two
  conditions, calculated as:
  ``` math
  A = \frac{1}{2}log_2(XY) = \frac{1}{2}\left[log_2(X)+log_2(Y)\right]
  ```

Most proteins are expected to exhibit little variation, leading to the
majority of points concentrating around the line M = 0 (indicating no
difference between group means).

## Rank abundance distribution plot (Whittaker plot)

The rank abundance plot shows proteins ranked by abundance to visualize
distribution patterns and highlight specific proteins across conditions
or replicates.

``` r

visualize.rank(dataImput, listName = "POLK_HUMAN",
               facet = c("Replicate", "Condition"))
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-12-1.png)

## Histogram of fold changes and p-values for test

### Examples

``` r

visualize.test(anlys_modt$`100pmol-50pmol`)
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-13-1.png)

If the input `dataSet` is the whole list `anlys_modt`, **msDiaLogue**
will produce individual subplots corresponding to each comparison.

``` r

visualize.test(anlys_modt)
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-14-1.png)

### Details

The function `visualize().test` can be applied to any test output. It
generates two useful plots: a histogram of fold changes across the
analyzed proteins and a histogram of p-values. The majority of proteins
are expected to show very small change between conditions, so the fold
change histogram will have a peak at around zero. For the p-values, most
p-values are expected to be non-significant (above 0.05). Depending on
the strength of the treatment effect, there may be a peak of p-values
near 0.

## UpSet plot

The UpSet plot is a visual representation that helps display the overlap
and intersection of sets or categories in a dataset. It is particularly
useful for illustrating the presence or absence of elements in
combinations of sets.

``` r

visualize.upset(dataSet)
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-15-1.png)

This plot reveals that 42 proteins are shared by 50pmol, 100pmol, and
200pmol, while only 3 proteins are shared by 100 pmol and 200pmol, but
not with 50pmol.

## Venn plot

The Venn plot is another graphical representation of the relationships
between sets. Each circle represents a set, and the overlapping regions
show the elements that are shared between sets.

``` r

visualize.venn(dataSet, show_percentage = TRUE,
               fill_color = c("blue", "yellow", "green", "red"),
               saveRes = TRUE)
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-16-1.png)

where `saveRes = TRUE` refers to the data containing logical columns
representing sets in Venn plot information will be saved as a .csv file
named *venn_information.csv* in the current working directory.

In the example above, 50pmol, 100pmol, and 200pmol groups share 42
proteins. Notably, 3 proteins are exclusively found in the 100pmol and
200pmol groups.

## Volcano plot

### Examples

``` r

visualize.volcano(anlys_modt$`100pmol-50pmol`, P.thres = 0.05, F.thres = 1)
#> Warning: Removed 32 rows containing missing values or values outside the scale range
#> (`geom_text_repel()`).
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-17-1.png)

If the input `dataSet` is the whole list `anlys_modt`, **msDiaLogue**
will produce individual subplots corresponding to each comparison.

``` r

visualize.volcano(anlys_modt, P.thres = 0.05, F.thres = 1)
#> Warning: Removed 65 rows containing missing values or values outside the scale range
#> (`geom_text_repel()`).
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-18-1.png)

### Details

A volcano plot is a graphical representation commonly used in proteomics
and genomics to visualize differential expression analysis results. It
is particularly useful for identifying significant changes in extensive
data. It displays two important pieces of information about differences
between conditions in a dataset:

- Statistical significance (vertical): Represents the negative log10 of
  the p-value.

- Fold change (horizontal): Represents the fold change.

## Scree plot

One way to help identify how many PCs to retain is to explore a scree
plot. The scree plot shows the percentage of variance explained by each
PC.

``` r

visualize.scree(anlys_pca, type = c("bar", "line"),
                bar.color = "gray", bar.fill = "gray", line.color = "black",
                label = TRUE, ncp = 10)
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-19-1.png)

where `label = TRUE` adds information labels at the top of bars/points,
and `ncp = 10` sets the number of dimension to be displayed.

## Score plot / graph of individuals

### Example

``` r

visualize.score(anlys_pca, ellipse = TRUE, ellipse.level = 0.95, label = TRUE)
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-20-1.png)

### Details

The primary PCA plot of individual data visually represents the
distribution of individual observations in a reduced-dimensional space,
typically defined by the PCs. The x and y axes of the PCA plot represent
the PCs. Each axis corresponds to a linear combination of the original
variables. Individual data points on the PCA plot represent observations
(e.g., samples) from the original dataset. Points that are close to the
origin (0, 0), are close to the “average” across all protein abundances.
If sufficient samples are present, the plot will also produce a 95%
confidence ellipse, as well as a centroid (mean for each group
provided), for each groups (condition) provided.

## Loading plot / graph of variables

### Example

``` r

visualize.loading(anlys_pca, label = TRUE)
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-21-1.png)

### Details

This plot will be more useful if your analyses are based on a relatively
small number of proteins. It represents the association, or loading of
each protein on the first two PCs. Longer arrows represents stronger
associations.

**Note:** Proteins that are weakly associated with PC1 or PC2 may still
be highly correlated with other PCs not being plotted. Consult the scree
plot (and other available methods) to determine the appropriate number
of PCs to investigate.

## Biplot of score (individuals) and loading (variables)

The biplot includes individual and variable plots. Again, with a large
number of proteins, this plot can be unwieldy.

``` r

visualize.biplot(anlys_pca, ellipse = TRUE, ellipse.level = 0.95, label = "all")
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-22-1.png)

## VIP score plot

This combined plot pairs a VIP-score chart on the left with a heatmap on
the right. The left panel shows each variable as a dot at its VIP score
from PLS-DA. Higher scores indicate greater importance for class
separation. The right panel uses colored tiles to show each top
variable’s average abundance across conditions. So you can instantly see
which variables matter most for class separation and how they behave in
each condition.

``` r

visualize.vip(anlys_plsda, comp = 1, num = 10, thres = 1)
```

![](visualization_files/figure-html/unnamed-chunk-23-1.png)

[←
Previous](https://uconn-scs.github.io/msDiaLogue/articles/analysis.md)

[Next →](https://uconn-scs.github.io/msDiaLogue/articles/other.md)
